Information for authors
Mission
The mission of Biophysical Journal ( BJ ) is to publish the highest quality biophysical research that elucidates important biological, chemical, or physical mechanisms and provides quantitative insight into fundamental problems at the molecular, cellular, systems, and whole-organism levels. Articles published in BJ should be of general interest to quantitative biologists, regardless of their research specialty.
Scope
BJ publishes original articles as well as reviews and perspectives on important problems in modern biophysics. The articles should be written so as to be of interest to a broad community of biophysicists. BJ welcomes experimental studies that use quantitative physical approaches for the study of biological systems, including or spanning scales from molecule to whole organism. Experimental studies of a purely descriptive or phenomenological nature, with no theoretical or mechanistic underpinning, are not appropriate for publication in BJ . Theoretical studies should offer new insights into the understanding of experimental results or suggest new experimentally testable hypotheses. Articles reporting significant methodological or technological advaances, which have potential to open new areas of biophysical investigation, are also suitable for publication in BJ . Manuscripts describing improvements in accuracy or speed of existing methods or extra detail within methods described previously are not suitable for BJ .
Manuscripts are handled by an editorial board of more than 110 scientists who solicit reviewers with the requisite expertise. The editorial board is led by nine Associate Editors, whose expertise serves to detail the scope of science published by BJ :
Valeria Vásquez—Channels, transporters, and receptors. Mechanistic studies of the structure, function, and regulation of membrane transport proteins and signaling receptors. The emphasis is on studies using experimental and/or computational methods. Papers that focus on the interaction of these proteins with the membrane should be submitted to Heiko Heerklotz.
Guy Genin—Cell biophysics. Biophysical studies that further our understanding of molecular function and interactions within and between cells and elucidate how these mechanisms are regulated within the cellular milieu. Papers with a significant component of in vitro studies of cellular components are often better suited for editors in the areas above. Papers that focus on complex signaling or metabolic networks, whole organisms, tissues, or organ physiology are often better suited for Alex Mogilner.
Alan Grossfield—Proteins. Biophysics of protein structure, function, and interactions. The emphasis is on molecular biophysics encompassing experimental, computational, and theoretical approaches. Papers that focus on membrane transport proteins or receptors or molecular motors and cytoskeletal proteins are more appropriate for Sudha Chakrapani and David Sept, respectively.
Heiko Heerklotz—Membranes. Analysis of the structure, organization, and function of artificial and biological membranes via state-of-the-art experimental and theoretical biophysics approaches. Please send papers that focus on the entire cellular response to Guy Genin. Papers that mainly tackle the molecular structure and function of membrane channels and transporters should be sent to Sudha Chakrapani.
Meyer Jackson, Christy Landes, Ilya Levental, Diane Lidke, Sua Myong, and Jeremiah Zartman—Reviews and biophysical perspectives (invited only). Reviews and perspectives cover topics of current interest in biophysics and are invited by the Reviews Editors in consultation with the Editor-in-Chief. Perspectives are brief, cover topics of current interest in biophysics, and are intended to provide a unique perspective on the current state and future of a field; reviews have a broader scope and are intended to provide a critical overview of the current state and future of a field. Reviews and perspectives generally do not present new data but can offer fresh syntheses of the results in a field. These articles are typically written by authorities in the field and are directed to a broad range of scientists who wish to keep abreast of the best current research. Reviews should be ~10 published pages and perspectives ~5 published pages, including figures and references.
Jason Kahn—Genome biophysics. Biophysical aspects of genome organization and related cellular functions such as transcription, translation, development, and gene regulation. Of particular interest are the structural states, folding, and function of chromatin and chromosomes, as well as the dynamic organization of the nucleus.
Nucleic acids. Investigations of the structure, dynamics, and function of DNA, RNA, and their complexes with other molecules using experimental and computational techniques.
Alex Mogilner—Systems biophysics. The analysis of collective properties in systems of interacting components, including biomolecular networks, organelles, tissues, organs, and whole organisms. Special emphasis is placed on studies that link multiple levels of biological organization, from gene sequence to nonlinear and network-level phenomena, such as pattern formation, metabolism, and signal transduction. Papers that focus on a cell biological mechanism are better directed to Guy Genin.
David Sept—Molecular machines, motors, and nanoscale biophysics. Biophysical studies of molecular motors (cytoskeletal and non-cytoskeletal), cytoskeletal assemblies, muscle contraction, and studies using single-molecule tracking, force spectroscopy, and other nanoscale techniques. Papers focused on general biophysical properties of nucleic acids, proteins, and membranes are better suited for Jason Kahn, Alan Grossfield, and Heiko Heerklotz, respectively.
Jeremy Smith—Computational biophysics. Papers on the development and application of methods and algorithms rationalizing biological data with biophysical modeling and simulation, bioinformatics, and artificial intelligence (AI). We encourage submissions on subjects ranging from single-molecule to cellular and population scales, as well as on integrative modeling of complex biological systems that combines data from multiple experimental and computational techniques.
All submissions are initially evaluated by the editors. Papers that do not conform to the general scope of the journal will be returned to the authors without detailed review. Research articles will be sent to at least two anonymous reviewers to assess the paper. The editors will make every effort to reach decisions on research articles within 1 month of the submission date. If revisions are a condition of publication, generally 3 months are allowed for revisions. The author’s accepted version of the manuscript will be published within 1 week of acceptance, which is considered the date of publication. A final edited and composed version of the paper will be published within 1 month of acceptance. Any major changes after acceptance are subject to review and may delay publication.
Article types
BJ welcomes unsolicited manuscripts and publishes invited papers.
Unsolicited manuscripts
Research (regular) articles
BJ publishes original research that reports experimental studies using quantitative physical approaches for the study of biological systems. Studies may address systems of any scale from molecule to whole organism and must include a theoretical or mechanistic underpinning. Theoretical studies should offer new insights into the understanding of experimental results or suggest new experimentally testable hypotheses.
Biophysical letters
Biophysical letters are short articles in diverse areas that report exceptionally important results in an accelerated manner. A letter should be of interest to a wide variety of readers and should potentially change the way the reader thinks about an important topic or address a critical question. A letter should tell a complete story without needing extensive data analysis, and it is not meant to serve as a means of publishing preliminary results. The criteria for acceptance of a letter are more stringent than for regular articles, and particular attention will be paid to the significance of the results.
Letters must not exceed five published pages (including figures and references). There will be no exceptions to this length limit. Letters are required to have an abstract, a statement of significance, and an author contributions section. They are not required to follow traditional manuscript organization (i.e., introduction, materials and methods, results, discussion, conclusion).
Only one revision cycle is allowed for letters, and revisions will be due within 30 days. The author of a letter requiring major revision will be invited to resubmit the work as a regular article. Letters are published online ahead of print once the author-corrected proof has been generated.
Comments to the Editor
These are short commentaries on an article published earlier in BJ . These are NOT short original articles. For a submission to qualify as a comment, it must not contain unpublished data and must be entirely free of polemic. Comments to the Editor may be rebutted by the authors of the previously published article. Comments and any rebuttals are subject to review. Editorial comments are limited to 4 pages with up to 10 references. Abstracts, significance statements, and author contributions are not required for comments.
Solicited manuscripts
New and notables
These commentaries, which highlight regular articles appearing in the same issue of BJ , are solicited by the handling editor (although any editor may recommend commissioning one). They are expected within 14 days of solicitation to facilitate rapid peer review and publication. Abstracts, significance statements, and author contributions should not be included for new and notable articles.
A new and notable gives the writer some leeway to highlight whatever he/she thinks is relevant as opposed to an inclusive overview. A new and notable can mention some of the limitations of the relevant article and thus where questions and controversies still lie and where future research can provide the next steps forward. Therefore, it should have no more than 10 references to earlier work and should also have an explicit citation of the article. It could be as short as half a page and be up to two published pages; importantly, it should convey excitement to a non-specialist reader regarding the advance made by the research article. There are no page charges associated with new and notables. Color figures will be online only color unless the author specifies otherwise and incurs the cost of print color.
Reviews and biophysical perspectives
Reviews and biophysical perspectives cover topics of current interest in biophysics and are invited by the Reviews Editors in consultation with the Editor-in-Chief. Perspectives are brief and are intended to provide a unique perspective on the current state and future of a field; reviews have a broader scope and are intended to provide a critical overview of the current state and future of a field. Reviews and perspectives generally do not present new data but can offer fresh syntheses of the results in a field. These articles are typically written by authorities in the field and are directed to a broad range of scientists who wish to keep abreast of the best current research. Reviews should be ~10 published pages and perspectives ~5 published pages, including figures and references. There are no page charges associated with either reviews or perspectives. Color figures will be online only color unless the author specifies otherwise and incurs the cost of print color. Significance statements and author contributions should not be included for reviews and biophysical perspectives.
Research highlights
Research highlights are short summaries written by editorial board members to be understood by a broad audience, highlighting a collection of articles published in BJ and placing the new findings in these papers into the context of the current literature in the field. Topics will be identified in consultation with the Editor-in-Chief. They should be ~1,200 words with up to 10–15 references. The abstract should be a maximum of 75 words. There are no page charges associated with an accepted research highlight. Color figures will appear in color online only unless the author specifies otherwise and incurs the cost of print color. Significance statements and author contributions should not be included for research highlights.
BJ classics
These invited manuscripts celebrate seminal articles originally published in BJ . The invited manuscripts are written by the original authors, their colleagues, and/or their students and explain how the original article has influenced the field and is still relevant today. The manuscript should be accessible to scientists outside the field and to students. BJ classics should be limited to five published pages in length (including figures and references), and the number of references should be limited to no more than 60 recent publications. There are no publication charges associated with an accepted BJ classic article.
Policies
Advertising
Biophysical Journal accepts advertising for its website that is appropriate for its readership and consistent with its mission. Decisions about accepting advertising are made independently of decisions about the content published in the journal.
Authorship
The co-authors of a manuscript should include all persons who have made significant scientific contributions to the reported work and who share responsibility and accountability for it. Other contributors should be indicated in the acknowledgments section. Inclusion of a name as an author is a statement that this person made significant scientific contributions; administrative relationships to the investigators do not qualify a person for co-authorship. Deceased persons who meet the criteria for co-authorship should be included, with a footnote indicating date of death.
If the author list includes a consortium, an optional list of members is permitted in a special “Consortia” section that appears just before the paper’s acknowledgments section. In such a case, a full list of members is required, although a URL may also be included if desired. No affiliations are permitted in the consortia section. If you wish to include affiliations, this list should appear as supporting material.
If a member list is included in the consortia section, the list will also be sent to PubMed for indexing (this will allow PubMed searches to return results for consortium members individually). Online, this list will appear as an expandable author list when readers click on the consortium name.
Submitting author . The author who submits a manuscript for publication accepts the full responsibility for including as co-authors all appropriate persons. The submitting author must previously have sent each co-author a draft copy of the manuscript and obtained the co-authors’ agreement to be co-authors. All authors will be notified that the manuscript has been submitted. To ensure acknowledgment of submission, current email addresses must be provided for all authors on a manuscript.
Corresponding author . For administrative purposes, one author is designated in the manuscript tracking system as the corresponding author for all matters regarding the published article (handling proof, publication charges, requests for materials, and requests for revisions). BJ will indicate this person as the point of contact for feedback on the published article. It is this author's full responsibility to ensure adherence to all editorial and submission policies and for any communications that may arise during publication, including informing all co-authors of any matters arising and dealing promptly with such matters. This author is not required to be the senior author of the manuscript. The person listed in the submission site as the corresponding author at the time of submission will determine the membership status of the manuscript regarding publication charges. A maximum of two co-corresponding authors may be indicated in the published article if so noted in the submitted manuscript file.
Competing interests. Transparency is essential for a reader’s trust in the scientific process and for the credibility of published articles. We feel that disclosure of competing interests is a critical aspect of transparency. Therefore, we ask that all authors disclose any financial or other interests related to the submitted work that (1) could affect or have the perception of affecting the author’s objectivity or (2) could influence or have the perception of influencing the content of the article. Such interests include a significant financial benefit or significant fractional ownership of a company with related interests and include financial interests of immediate family members. Authors must declare any competing interests in (1) the cover letter, (2) a declaration of interests section within the manuscript itself, and (3) a "declaration of interests" form, which must be submitted alongside their manuscript. If there are no competing interests, authors should indicate the following in the manuscript and on the form: "The authors declare no competing interests." A declaration of interests section is required for most article types, but some article types may be exempt; please consult the editorial office at [email protected] with any questions.
Ethics
BJ expects authors to abide by the general ethics polices outlined by the Council of Science Editors and the Committee on Publication Ethics. Please use the links below as references.
Recommendations for promoting integrity in scientific journal publications Opens in new window
Wager, E., and S. Kleinert. 2011. Responsible research publication: International standards for authors (PDF) . A position statement developed at the 2nd World Conference on Research Integrity, Singapore, July 22–24, 2010. In Promoting Research Integrity in a Global Environment. T. Mayer and N. Steneck, eds. Imperial College Press/World Scientific Publishing, Singapore, pp. 309–316.
Use of animals. All experiments on live vertebrates or higher invertebrates must be performed in accordance with relevant institutional and national guidelines and regulations. The materials and methods section of the manuscript must include a statement identifying the appropriate institutional animal care and use committee that approved the experiments and confirmed that all experiments conformed to the relevant regulatory standards. The editors reserve the right to seek comments from reviewers or additional information from authors on any cases in which concerns arise.
Use of human subjects. If the manuscript reports results of studies of either human subjects or materials obtained from human subjects, it should state in the materials and methods section that the study was approved by the appropriate institutional review board (IRB) and that appropriate informed consent was obtained from human subjects. Copies of signed consent forms from identifiable persons appearing in any photographs submitted with the manuscript must be e-mailed to the BJ editorial office ( [email protected] ) or included in the submission file at the time of submission. To avoid violation of HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996) regulations, the consent form should state that subjects understand that their identity (but not their medical records) will be divulged to the BJ office by the transmission of the signed consent form. Alternatively, a member of the institution’s IRB can send a letter confirming that signed consent forms have been obtained from the individuals pictured in the manuscript, without naming the individuals. A manuscript cannot be processed until these consent forms or a letter from the IRB is received.
Confidential information. Information obtained in the course of confidential services, such as refereeing manuscripts or grant applications, cannot be used in the planning and conduct of the research or the preparation of the manuscript.
Corrections and name changes. Authors of material published in BJ have the full responsibility to inform BJ promptly if they become aware of any required corrections after publication. A request for a correction must be made by the corresponding author, who is responsible for informing all authors of the correction. Authors should send the corrected text in a Word document to [email protected] . BJ will determine whether to change the article after it has been published online or publish a correction in the next available issue that will link to the original publication, or both. The journal reserves the right to send the correction text to a senior editor for review. In the case of a printed correction, the corresponding author will receive a proof of the correction.
Upon request from authors who have changed their name, we will update author names on published papers and publish a correction. In cases of authors with a strong need for privacy, the change will be made invisibly, without publishing a correction. We will also arrange to update the article metadata in secondary indexation databases, specifically Clarivate/Web of Science, PubMed, and Scopus. Authors can submit a request for a change of name by emailing [email protected] . For more information, see https://www.elsevier.com/about/policies/inclusive-author-name-changes Opens in new window . (Authors requesting corrections of typographic errors in their published name should contact the journal directly.)
Expressions of concern and retractions. We will investigate concerns regarding potential research misconduct that are brought to our attention. If our initial assessment indicates that the concerns may have merit, we will conduct a thorough investigation beginning with a request for relevant data from the corresponding author of the published article. The results of the investigation will dictate the journal’s action. If the expressed concerns are not substantiated, the journal will take no action. If the investigation is expected to be protracted, we may issue an expression of concern as an interim measure to alert the journal’s readership. If the investigation reveals research misconduct, we will ask the authors to retract the article and will work with them to finalize the text of the retraction statement.
Manuscripts authored by a member of the editorial board. Manuscripts authored by editors or members of the editorial board are handled with the same editorial process and high degree of confidentiality as submissions from all other authors. All possible measures are undertaken to avoid any potential conflict of interest in the handling of such manuscripts at all stages, including allocation of the handling editor, selection of reviewers, decision making, and, if required, processing for publication.
Generative AI in scientific writing
The guidance below refers only to the writing process, and not to the use of AI tools to analyze and draw insights from data as part of the research process.
Where authors use generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process, authors should use these technologies only to improve readability and language. Applying the technology should be done with human oversight and control, and authors should carefully review and edit the result, because AI can generate authoritative-sounding output that can be incorrect, incomplete, or biased. AI and AI-assisted technologies should not be listed as an author or co-author or be cited as an author. Authorship implies responsibilities and tasks that can be attributed to and performed only by humans, as outlined in Elsevier’s AI policy for authors Opens in new window .
Authors should disclose in their manuscript the use of AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process by following the instructions below. A statement will appear in the published work. Please note that authors are ultimately responsible and accountable for the contents of the work.
Disclosure instructions. Authors must disclose the use of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process by adding a statement at the end of their manuscript in the core manuscript file, before the references list. The statement should be placed in a new section titled "Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process."
Statement: During the preparation of this work the author(s) used [NAME TOOL / SERVICE] in order to [REASON]. After using this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the publication.
This declaration does not apply to the use of basic tools for checking grammar, spelling, references etc. If there is nothing to disclose, there is no need to add a statement.
Open access and funder requirements
Authors are responsible for checking their funder requirements to determine if gold open access is required and ensuring that the appropriate license is chosen. Authors who choose gold open access retain copyright in their articles.
The journal has a 12-month embargo policy, meaning that only BJ subscribers can gain access to the published article for the first 12 months. Authors have the choice to pay an open access publication fee to make the article immediately and freely available for everyone to read and download (see table here ). You may find more information about our open access policies and FAQs here .
For authors who choose to publish open access or whose funders require that the work be published under a Creative Commons license, the Biophysical Society (BPS) offers two options:
The first option is the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported License (CC-BY), which allows users to alter and build upon the article and then distribute the resulting work, even commercially. As with all Creative Commons licenses, the work must be attributed to the original author and publisher. This license encourages maximum use and distribution but gives the author the least control about how the work might appear.
The second option is the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 4.0 Unported License (CC-BY-NC-ND), which allows users to copy and distribute the article, provided the work is attributed to the original author and publisher. The article cannot be changed in any way or used commercially. This license gives the author the most control about how the work might be published.
Once selected, Creative Commons user licenses are non-revocable. We recommend that authors check if their funding body requires a specific license. See the Creative Commons Opens in new window website for more details about what to consider before choosing a user license.
On behalf of NIH-funded authors, BJ deposits final published articles in PubMed Central for release 12 months after the date of publication. For all open access articles, the final published version is deposited to PubMed Central with no embargo
Peer review
All submitted manuscripts are first evaluated by journal editors to determine whether the manuscripts fit within the journal’s scope. If a manuscript is deemed to be outside the journal’s scope or of insufficient quality to warrant the use of reviewers’ time, then it is editorially rejected without being sent for outside peer review. Note that manuscripts may be considered for other BPS journals, and all reviews could be viewed by those journals’ Editors-in-Chief. Otherwise, a manuscript is sent to two or three peer reviewers who assess the scientific merits of the presented research and indicate potential revisions to improve the quality of the manuscript. The peer reviewers remain anonymous unless they choose to identify themselves. The handling editor then makes a decision on the basis of the reviews received regarding the manuscript’s suitability for publication. If a major revision is requested, the revised manuscript is generally sent to at least one of the original reviewers for re-evaluation. The journal normally permits only one major revision.
Permissions
If you want to use excerpts or images, original or adapted, from articles that you have published in BPS, Cell Press, or Elsevier journals, you do not need to ask for permission. Our policy Opens in new window requires only that you cite the original publication. For information about how to request permission to use copyrighted material, please visit /permissions .
BJ uses RightsLink to manage permissions requests ( https://www.copyright.com/publishers/rightslink/ Opens in new window ). If you navigate to the article on /biophysj/home and then click on the copyright icon to the right of the title, it will take you to the appropriate permissions page on RightsLink. Follow the prompts to obtain permissions.
If you have adapted a published figure, you may or may not need permission from the copyright owner, depending on how much the adaptation resembles the original. When in doubt, check with the copyright owner and cite the original article.
Preprints
Some authors prefer to post their manuscripts to preprint servers before submitting them to primary research journals. BJ will consider for publication manuscripts that have been posted informally on a private website or on arXiv, bioRxiv, ChemRxiv, medRxiv, GitGub, or Research Square, but will not consider manuscripts that have been posted on other preprint servers or "virtual journal" websites. Questions related to this policy should be directed to the editorial office ( [email protected] ). Users of bioRxiv may submit to BJ directly from the preprint server. If submitting a manuscript to BJ that has a preprint in arXiv, have your arXiv identification number ready, and the system will auto-populate the metadata.
Authors may opt to include the following statement with their manuscript: “A preliminary version of this work, [doi], was deposited in [name of preprint server] on [date].” Please include this wording in the acknowledgments section of your manuscript file. In addition, BJ ’s prepublication policies with regard to coverage in the broader media still apply to studies posted on preprint servers.
Prepublication publicity
We take seriously our responsibility to support informed scientific journalism and look to encourage balanced and accurate coverage that avoids inappropriate hype. To assist with these aims, most journals operate an embargoed press release system, which allows reporters a protected window to develop their stories. Embargoed BJ papers are made available to the media up to 1 week before publication and are under media embargo until 11 a.m. (United States, Eastern Time) on the date of their publication. We ask authors not to begin active promotion of their work until this 1-week window. The embargo date and time should be clearly communicated in any materials distributed in advance to the press and in conversations with reporters.
We always encourage authors to share their work with the scientific community through conference presentations and other discussions. We also understand that some of our authors might choose to share copies of their manuscripts by posting them online on a preprint server. With online posting, we appreciate that information about the work is publicly available and might therefore be covered by media outlets or other venues and that authors might be contacted by and speak to reporters, but please note that early coverage can impact media interest in a paper at the time of publication.
Please contact our press office ( [email protected] ) if you or your press officer needs embargo information for your paper, you plan on hosting a press conference, or there are special circumstances that you would like to discuss.
Prior publication
Manuscripts submitted to the journal must be original; except for the specific exception noted below, manuscripts and supporting material that have already been published or are concurrently submitted elsewhere for publication are not acceptable for submission.
If some part of the work has appeared, or will appear, elsewhere, the authors must give the specific details of such appearances in the cover letter accompanying the manuscript submission. If previously published illustrative material, such as figures or tables, or excerpts must be included, the authors are responsible for citing the original publication and obtaining the appropriate permissions from the publisher(s) before such content may be published in BJ . For information about how to request permission to use copyrighted material, please visit /information-for-authors/permissions .
Refutations
It is the policy of BJ that, once it has published an article, it accepts responsibility to consider for publication manuscripts that refute the interpretations of the results in the original article according to the journal’s established standards for evaluating the suitability.
Rights, sharing, and embargoes
An overview of the rights that authors retain, the options for sharing articles at various stages, and the duration of embargo periods, as well as open access options, is available at /information-for-authors/rights-sharing-embargoes .
Data and image processing
Authors should make every attempt to minimize the post-acquisition processing of data. Some degree of processing may be unavoidable and is permitted provided that the processing procedure is described and that the final data accurately reflect the original. In the case of image processing, alterations must be applied to the entire image (e.g., brightness, contrast, color balance). In case this is not possible (e.g., alterations to a single color channel on a microscopy image), any alterations must be clearly stated in the figure legend and in the materials and methods section. Groupings and consolidation of data (e.g., cropping of images or removal of lanes from gels and blots) must be explicitly indicated in the appropriate figure and figure legends. Examples of unretouched images are welcomed in the supporting material.
Data comparisons should be made only among comparative experiments, and individual data should not be reused across multiple figures. When data are used multiple times (e.g., multiple experiments were performed simultaneously with a single control experiment), this must be clearly stated in each figure legend.
If it is deemed necessary for proper evaluation of the manuscript, authors will be required to make the original unprocessed data available to the handling editor. The figures in all accepted manuscripts will be examined before publication.
Materials and data availability
One of the terms and conditions of publishing in BJ is that authors agree to distribute materials (cells, DNA, antibodies, reagents, organisms, and software) and protocols developed during the course of published studies, as well as the data that were generated, to qualified researchers for their own use. Materials and protocols should be made available with minimal restrictions and in a timely manner, but it is acceptable to request reasonable payment to cover the cost of maintenance and transport of materials. Exceptions to this would include cases where supplies of purified proteins or reagents are highly limited, or where the transfer would violate compliance considerations. Other exceptions will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Editors. Whenever feasible, data sets should be made available to readers from the date of publication and must be provided to the handling editor upon request for the purpose of evaluating the manuscript. Authors are encouraged to deposit data in Mendeley Data. In addition, articles must include a comprehensive and accurate data availability statement. The general form of a data availability statement is as follows: [Type of data] data have been deposited at [name of data repository] under the accession number [database accession number] and are publicly available as of the article publication date. If data cannot be deposited in a public data repository, please indicate that fact and the reason behind it. Please also instruct the reader on how access to those data can be requested. If your article features an analysis of publicly available data, please indicate how those data can be accessed. Finally, if data are not publicly available, please inform the reader that data will be shared upon reasonable request.
Articles in BJ are based on many different kinds of data, and community-endorsed data standards and public repositories are not available for all types of data sets. When there are community-endorsed standards and repositories, the full data set must be submitted to an appropriate repository, and accession numbers must be provided in the article. Examples of data sets and public repositories are listed below. (The list of repositories is not intended to be complete, and authors may deposit their data in public repositories not listed below, as long they state where the data are deposited.) Please contact the journal ( [email protected] ) if you would like advice about how to share data and/or examples of repositories that facilitate sharing large data sets.
Structures of biological macromolecules
The atomic coordinates and related experimental data (structure factor amplitudes/intensities and/or NMR restraints) must be deposited at a member site of the Worldwide Protein Data Bank (wwPDB). Authors must agree to release the atomic coordinates and experimental data when the associated article is published.
For manuscripts reporting electron cryomicroscopy (cryo-EM) density maps and fitted coordinates, authors are encouraged to include with their submission either maps and coordinates, or a movie that shows an interactive session describing the map and the fit of the model in sufficient detail. Authors must agree to make the images and relevant metadata needed to reproduce a published EM reconstruction available when the article is published, preferably by depositing in the Electron Microscopy Pilot Image Archive Opens in new window (EMPIAR) or upon reasonable request. Cryo-EM-derived density maps must be deposited into the EMDataBank Opens in new window (EMDB) through one of the partner sites ( Protein Data Bank in Europe Opens in new window > or EMDataBank Opens in new window ). Atomic coordinates fitted to EM maps must also be deposited to a wwPDB member site. (If an article discusses a protein structure only at the level of the main chain alpha carbon atoms, only alpha carbon coordinates need be deposited. If the discussion involves higher-resolution data, a full coordinate list must be deposited.)
BJ encourages authors to deposit the information before the manuscript is submitted because the corresponding database IDs must be included in the manuscript, and the handling editor should be informed no later than the completion of the editorial process that the necessary information has been sent to the appropriate data bank. BJ recommends that authors include the PDB validation report as part of the online supporting material for all new submissions describing results of X-ray and NMR structure determination.
For articles that include NMR spectra, authors must deposit the chemical shifts, coupling constants, relaxation data and other relevant data in the Biological Magnetic Resonance Data Bank Opens in new window (BMRB) before submission of the manuscript and include the BMRB ID in the manuscript.
For articles that include circular dichroism spectra of proteins, authors must deposit the raw, processed, and metadata in the Protein Circular Dichroism Data Bank Opens in new window (PCDDB) before submission of the manuscript and include the PCDDB ID in the manuscript.
Rigorous statistical analysis
Any statistical analysis must be checked for accuracy by the authors; if statistical software is used, the source (including version number) of the tools must be listed in materials and methods. Authors are strongly encouraged to seek the assistance of a statistician at their institution or elsewhere; if they seek such advice, the resource should be identified in the letter of submission.
Statistics should be fully reported in the manuscript/article, including the statistical test used, exact value of N and the definitions of center and dispersion and the precision measures (e.g., mean, median, SD, SEM, confidence intervals).
Manuscripts that report results based on the analysis of large data sets, such as genomic studies, genome-wide association studies, and next-generation sequencing-based studies are required to specify in detail how the statistical analyses were done.
Transparency and reproducibility
BJ has no page limitations for research articles and allows for the submission of online supporting material. To ensure that published studies can be replicated, authors should adhere to the following standards:
	•	Describe materials and methods in sufficient detail to enable researchers in other laboratories to reproduce the experiments described in the manuscript. A STAR methods section is acceptable but not required.
	•	Use the generally accepted nomenclature in their field; define all non-standard terms.
	•	Report how often each experiment was replicated and, where applicable, whether the results were substantiated by replication over a range of conditions.
	•	Provide sufficient information to allow readers to distinguish between independent data points and technical replicates.
	•	Where applicable, state whether the samples were randomized and, if so, the method of randomization.
	•	Where applicable, state whether the experiments were anonymized and, if so, how.
	•	Where applicable, specify whether the authors undertook a sample-size estimate when planning the study and, if so, how.
In manuscripts that report the development of novel chemical tools, or the use of known compounds, the authors should use systemic nomenclature to refer to the compounds, based on the guidelines developed by International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC); informal common names, such as dioleoylphosphatidylcholine, cholesterol or sucrose, are also acceptable. In the case of novel chemical tools, the authors are required to provide the exact structures of the compounds (prepared according to the IUPAC recommendations) and are encouraged to explain how each reported chemical structure was identified according to established standards in the field.
Data and image processing
Authors should make every attempt to minimize the post-acquisition processing of data. Some degree of processing may be unavoidable and is permitted provided that the processing procedure is described and that the final data accurately reflect the original. In the case of image processing, alterations must be applied to the entire image (e.g., brightness, contrast, color balance). In case this is not possible (e.g., alterations to a single color channel on a microscopy image), any alterations must be clearly stated in the figure legend and in the materials and methods section. Groupings and consolidation of data (e.g., cropping of images or removal of lanes from gels and blots) must be explicitly indicated in the appropriate figure and figure legends. Examples of unretouched images are welcomed in the supporting material.
Data comparisons should be made only among comparative experiments, and individual data should not be reused across multiple figures. When data are used multiple times (e.g., multiple experiments were performed simultaneously with a single control experiment), this must be clearly stated in each figure legend.
If it is deemed necessary for proper evaluation of the manuscript, authors will be required to make the original unprocessed data available to the handling editor. The figures in all accepted manuscripts will be examined before publication.
Materials and data availability
One of the terms and conditions of publishing in BJ is that authors agree to distribute materials (cells, DNA, antibodies, reagents, organisms, and software) and protocols developed during the course of published studies, as well as the data that were generated, to qualified researchers for their own use. Materials and protocols should be made available with minimal restrictions and in a timely manner, but it is acceptable to request reasonable payment to cover the cost of maintenance and transport of materials. Exceptions to this would include cases where supplies of purified proteins or reagents are highly limited, or where the transfer would violate compliance considerations. Other exceptions will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Editors. Whenever feasible, data sets should be made available to readers from the date of publication and must be provided to the handling editor upon request for the purpose of evaluating the manuscript. Authors are encouraged to deposit data in Mendeley Data. In addition, articles must include a comprehensive and accurate data availability statement. The general form of a data availability statement is as follows: [Type of data] data have been deposited at [name of data repository] under the accession number [database accession number] and are publicly available as of the article publication date. If data cannot be deposited in a public data repository, please indicate that fact and the reason behind it. Please also instruct the reader on how access to those data can be requested. If your article features an analysis of publicly available data, please indicate how those data can be accessed. Finally, if data are not publicly available, please inform the reader that data will be shared upon reasonable request.
Articles in BJ are based on many different kinds of data, and community-endorsed data standards and public repositories are not available for all types of data sets. When there are community-endorsed standards and repositories, the full data set must be submitted to an appropriate repository, and accession numbers must be provided in the article. Examples of data sets and public repositories are listed below. (The list of repositories is not intended to be complete, and authors may deposit their data in public repositories not listed below, as long they state where the data are deposited.) Please contact the journal ( [email protected] ) if you would like advice about how to share data and/or examples of repositories that facilitate sharing large data sets.
Structures of biological macromolecules
The atomic coordinates and related experimental data (structure factor amplitudes/intensities and/or NMR restraints) must be deposited at a member site of the Worldwide Protein Data Bank (wwPDB). Authors must agree to release the atomic coordinates and experimental data when the associated article is published.
For manuscripts reporting electron cryomicroscopy (cryo-EM) density maps and fitted coordinates, authors are encouraged to include with their submission either maps and coordinates, or a movie that shows an interactive session describing the map and the fit of the model in sufficient detail. Authors must agree to make the images and relevant metadata needed to reproduce a published EM reconstruction available when the article is published, preferably by depositing in the Electron Microscopy Pilot Image Archive Opens in new window (EMPIAR) or upon reasonable request. Cryo-EM-derived density maps must be deposited into the EMDataBank Opens in new window (EMDB) through one of the partner sites ( Protein Data Bank in Europe Opens in new window > or EMDataBank ). Atomic coordinates fitted to EM maps must also be deposited to a wwPDB member site. (If an article discusses a protein structure only at the level of the main chain alpha carbon atoms, only alpha carbon coordinates need be deposited. If the discussion involves higher-resolution data, a full coordinate list must be deposited.)
BJ encourages authors to deposit the information before the manuscript is submitted because the corresponding database IDs must be included in the manuscript, and the handling editor should be informed no later than the completion of the editorial process that the necessary information has been sent to the appropriate data bank. BJ recommends that authors include the PDB validation report as part of the online supporting material for all new submissions describing results of X-ray and NMR structure determination.
For articles that include NMR spectra, authors must deposit the chemical shifts, coupling constants, relaxation data and other relevant data in the Biological Magnetic Resonance Data Bank (BMRB) before submission of the manuscript and include the BMRB ID in the manuscript.
For articles that include circular dichroism spectra of proteins, authors must deposit the raw, processed, and metadata in the Protein Circular Dichroism Data Bank (PCDDB) before submission of the manuscript and include the PCDDB ID in the manuscript.
Small-molecule structures
SBML (Systems Biology Markup Language) and CELLML are two emerging standards for encoding computational models related to systems biology and physiology. To ensure public access to such computational models, authors should, where applicable, deposit their models in the CellML Model Repository Opens in new window or the Biomodels Database Opens in new window . Other public databases for models developed in NEURON () or VCell ( http://vcell.org/ Opens in new window ) should also be used where applicable. When this is not possible (e.g., in the case of MatLab or other code), authors should include their model code as a file in the online supporting material.
DNA and protein sequences
	•	Protein sequences: UniProt Opens in new window
	•	DNA and RNA sequences: GenBank Opens in new window , European Nucleotide Archive Opens in new window (ENA), DNA Data Bank of Japan Opens in new window (DDBJ), Protein Data Bank Opens in new window , UniProt Opens in new window
	•	DNA sequencing data (traces and short reads): National Center for Biotechnology Information Sequence Read Archive, ENA's Sequence Read Archive
	•	Deep sequencing data: deposit in GEO Opens in new window (Gene Expression Omnibus) or ArrayExpress Opens in new window upon submission to the journal
	•	The sequences of all RNAi, antisense, and morpholino probes must be included in the article or deposited in a public database with the accession number provided in the article.
	•	Human genomic data containing newly described single-nucleotide polymorphisms and copy number variations identified in control samples must be deposited in an appropriate repository such as dbSNP Opens in new window (Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Database), the Database of Genomic Variants Archive Opens in new window (DGVa), or the Database of Genomic Structural Variation Opens in new window (dbVAR).
Articles based on genomic data generated from HeLa cells must comply with the NIH HeLa Genome Data Use Agreement by affirming that the NIH has approved use of the data and acknowledging the contributions of Henrietta Lacks and her family to the research.
Proteomics and protein interactions data
	•	PRIDE Opens in new window , PeptideAtlas Opens in new window
	•	The IMEx consortium of databases Opens in new window
Chemical compound screening
	•	PubChem Opens in new window
Computational systems and physiological models
SBML (Systems Biology Markup Language) and CELLML are two emerging standards for encoding computational models related to systems biology and physiology. To ensure public access to such computational models, authors should, where applicable, deposit their models in the CellML Model Repository Opens in new window or the Biomodels Database Opens in new window . Other public databases for models developed in NEURON ( https://modeldb.science/ Opens in new window ) or VCell ( http://vcell.org/ Opens in new window ) should also be used where applicable. When this is not possible (e.g., in the case of MatLab or other code), authors should include their model code as a file in the online supporting material.
Cell imaging data
Currently, there is no community-endorsed repository of cell imaging data. If practical, raw image data should be made available as supporting material. Also, authors should, where applicable, make the image processing code available, preferably as a plug-in to open source software such as ImageJ Opens in new window or Python Opens in new window .
Software
Authors must declare the location and accessibility of any custom code and software central to the main claims of their paper. We recommend deposition of source code on GitHub Opens in new window together with a listing on Zenodo Opens in new window , which will assign a Digital Object Identifier (DOI) to make the upload uniquely citeable; this DOI should be reported in the manuscript.
Enzyme activity and kinetics data
When reporting kinetic and equilibrium binding data, authors should consult the Standards for Reporting Enzymology Data (STRENDA) commission guidelines. See the Beilstein Institut STRENDA Commission Guidelines website ( https://www.beilstein-institut.de/en/projects/strenda/guidelines/ Opens in new window ) for details. Manuscripts reporting kinetic and binding data must include a description of the identity of the catalytic or binding entity (enzyme, protein, nucleic acid, or other molecule). This information should include the origin or source of the molecule, its purity, composition, and other characteristics such as post-translational modifications, mutations, and any modifications made to facilitate expression or purification. The assay methods and exact experimental conditions of the assay must be fully described, if it is a new assay, or provided as a reference to previously published work, with or without modifications (where any modifications must be specified). The temperature, pH, and pressure (if other than atmospheric) of the assay must be included, even if previously published.
Database linking
BJ encourages authors to connect articles with external databases, giving their readers one-click access to relevant databases that help to build a better understanding of the described research. Please refer to relevant database identifiers by using the following format in your article: “Database: xxxx" for single accession numbers and “Database: xxxx, yyyy, zzzz" for multiple accession numbers (e.g., “GenBank: NM_000492"; “MIM: 180902"; “PDB: 1TUP, 1KW4, 3H5X"). (Please note that RefSeq numbers should now be referred to as GenBank numbers.) See https://www.elsevier.com/authors/author-resources/research-data/data-base-linking Opens in new window for more information and a full list of supported databases.
Peer review
Presubmission inquiries
Editorial input on whether a paper might be a strong candidate for consideration at BJ is available through a presubmission inquiry to [email protected] . This inquiry should include an Abstract plus a brief description of the results and an explanation of the interest and significance to the broad readership of BJ . Responses to inquiries are generally made within 2–5 days.
Editorial Manager
The BJ online manuscript-submission system, Editorial Manager (EM), is located at https://www.editorialmanager.com/biophysical-journal/ Opens in new window . Research articles, comments to the Editor, new and notables, reviews, and biophysical perspectives are all handled through this online submission system. All authors are requested to indicate the section that best describes the topic of their manuscript and to suggest at least three potential reviewers. Suggested reviewers should not have the same affiliation as the authors, nor should they have published together within the preceding 3 years.
Status inquiries
EM identifies the status as "received by editor" until an initial editorial decision is made. If the manuscript is sent for review, EM will update the status to "under review." When reviews are complete, the status will say "reviews completed." If further information is needed about the status of a submitted manuscript, please email [email protected] .
Manuscript preparation
English usage
All submitted manuscripts should be written with the use of proper English. A list of publishing resources, including assistance with writing and editing, is available on the BPS website Opens in new window .
Page limits
For regular research articles, we encourage manuscripts of a maximum of 12 published pages (including figures and references).
Article type
Page limit
Research articles
None*
Biophysical letters
5
New and notables
2
Comments to the Editor
4
Reviews
10
Perspectives
5
Order of manuscript sections
Title page
Abstract
Statement of significance
Main text
Appendices (if any)
Author contributions
Declaration of interests
Acknowledgments
References (numbered)
Figures
Tables
Supporting material
Title page . The title of each manuscript should identify the content of the article; clarity and conciseness are essential for indexing, abstracting, and retrieval. Titles should be no more than 150 characters total, including spaces, and must be able to be separated onto three lines of type of no more than 50 characters each (including spaces). A condensed running title of no more than 40 characters (including spaces) must be provided on the title page. Author names should be spelled out rather than set in initials and should not include professional titles. Authors should be footnoted with numerical superscripts to their corresponding affiliations and shared authorship roles. Commas should precede numerical superscripts (e.g., John B. Smith, 1 Jane C. Doe, 2 etc.). Affiliations should contain the following information in this order: department(s) or subunit(s), institution, city, state or region, zip code or postal code, country.
Unrestricted joint authorship is permitted, subject to Editor’s prerogative. Joint authors should be footnoted with numerical superscripts. The footnote should read "These authors contributed equally to this work" and should appear directly after the affiliation addresses.

A "Present address" footnote may be used. It should appear directly before the corresponding authorship footnote and be designated with a numerical superscript.

The “Correspondence” line should include the email address of the corresponding author(s) and should appear as the last footnote. Corresponding authors should be footnoted with non-superscript asterisks to their email addresses.
Abstract . Each manuscript must be accompanied by an informative abstract of no more than 300 words. Abstracts should describe the substance of the manuscript in language that non-specialists can understand and must make clear the biological significance of the research. Reference citations are not allowed in the abstract of a manuscript.
Statement of significance. BJ requires authors to supply a statement of significance along with their manuscript. Authors must submit a 120-word-maximum statement about the significance of their research paper written at a level understandable to a scientist outside their field of specialty. The primary goal of the significance statement is to explain the relevance of the work to a broad readership. The significance statement is required for all regular (research) articles. It should be placed just below the abstract. A statement of significance should not be included for other types of articles.
Main text . The text should be organized into the following sections: introduction, materials and methods, results, discussion (or results and discussion), and conclusion. Theoretical manuscripts may include just a methods section and do not require a materials section. When submitting a manuscript for review, it is preferable if figures and tables, along with their titles and captions, are embedded in the text as they are referenced in the manuscript.
Introduction: The introduction should be succinct, with no subheadings, and should present the background information necessary to provide a biophysical context for the results.
Materials and methods : The materials and methods section needs to include sufficient detail so that readers can understand how the experiments were performed and so that all procedures can be repeated in conjunction with cited references. This section should also include a description of any statistical methods used in the study. Theoretical papers may use the heading “Methods.” Capitalize trade names and give manufacturers’ full names.
Results: The results section may be divided with subheadings.
Discussion: The discussion should explain the significance of the results and place them into a broader context. It should not be redundant with the results section. This section may contain subheadings.
Footnotes : The only footnotes should be in tables (defined within the table legend). Footnotes should be lettered (a, b, c, etc.). Please do not use the range format to indicate multiple footnotes; instead, list each footnote individually (e.g., a,b,c,d, not a–d).
Abbreviations : Abbreviations should be defined in the text at first mention. Usage of abbreviations should be kept at a minimum.
Math and equations : Equations are to be typewritten. Clearly indicate capital and lowercase letters. Label Greek and unusual symbols the first time they appear. Use fractional exponents instead of root signs. The solidus (/) for fractions will save vertical space. Equation numbers should be cited in the text without parentheses (e.g., Eq. 9, Eq. 10). Do not cite equations numerically only but be sure to add “Eq.” before the equation number. Do not cite equations in the abstract. You may use LaTeX, MathType, Equation Builder, or Microsoft Equation 3.0 (also known as Equation Editor). BJ has partnered with Overleaf to provide an easy-to-use LaTex template Opens in new window in which you can compose and edit your manuscript and submit directly to BJ . Use a period (full stop) instead of
Appendices. Detailed results of relevant analyses may be presented as an appendix. Appendices may contain subheadings.
Data availability. Authors should include a comprehensive and accurate data availability statement in their manuscript, as a separate subheading before the author contributions. For additional information on the format and content expected in this statement, please see the “Materials and data availability” section above.
Author contributions . Authors should include an author contributions section in their manuscript, as a separate subheading just before the declaration of interests (or acknowledgments for those article types that do not require a declaration of interests statement). This text should describe the specific contributions of each author, designated by initials, to the submitted work. Examples of such author designations could include the following: “designed research,” “performed research,” “contributed analytic tools,” “analyzed data,” or “wrote the manuscript.” An author may have contributed to more than one aspect of the work, and more than one author may have contributed to the same aspect of the work.
Declaration of interests. This requirement applies to most article types, but some article types may be exempt; please consult the editorial office at [email protected] with any questions. Please also see the "Competing interests" section above.
Acknowledgements . Those who are not authors but who assisted with the work, funders, and others may be acknowledged here. This section should be proofread carefully, because amendments or corrections are unlikely to be considered for publication as corrections.
References . See guidelines below for formatting references.
In text
References are cited in numerical order in the text and are designated by that reference number in parentheses. The numbers, in parentheses, can be repeated at each citation of the referenced material. Reference citations are not allowed in the abstract. The following is an example of numbered citations:
Membrane channels with large aqueous pores are traditionally regarded as “molecular sieves” that discriminate between different molecules based on their size (1,2). This simplified view, however, contradicts emerging experimental evidence that permeation through these structures involves intimate molecular interactions (3–5). Metabolite-specific channels exhibit affinity to their metabolites; permeating molecules do not just slip through the pore but feel strong attraction to the pore-lining residues. The now classical example is bacterial porin LamB (6), where the existence of an extended binding zone for oligosaccharides is firmly established. More recent examples include ATP interactions with VDAC (3) and penicillin antibiotic interactions with the general bacterial porin OmpF (4,6–8).
References should include only articles that are published or in press. For references to in press articles, please confirm with the cited journal that the article is in fact accepted and in press, and include a DOI number and scheduled online publication date, if available. Posted preprints may also be included in the references list with appropriate identification information and an independent persistent identifier such as a DOI. In the references list, "et al." should be used only after 10 authors. Each reference is numbered according to the number in which it appears in the text.
In-text citations (unpublished data, personal communications, and unpublished meeting abstracts)
Citations such as “unpublished data” and “personal communication” should be included parenthetically in the text, with all authors’ initials and last names and years, and must not appear in the reference section. The names of individuals mentioned in personal communications should be included in the acknowledgments section along with their institutional affiliations. Provide written permission to use the material cited when submitting the manuscript. Submitted articles that have not yet been accepted should be cited as data not shown, unpublished data, or a personal communication. Unpublished data may refer only to work from an author of the manuscript being submitted. Unpublished meeting abstracts should also be cited parenthetically in the text.
See the examples below:
Unpublished data
(K.H., unpublished data, 2021)
Personal communication
(J. Smith, personal communication, 2021)
Unpublished meeting abstract
(J. Doe et al., 1997, Galactic Expansion Soc., abstract)
Supporting references
References cited only in supporting material must be included at the end of the main-text reference list. These supporting references should also be cited within the article text in a short section titled “Supporting citations” appearing before the references. The wording of this section is as follows: "References (XX–XX) appear in the supporting material.”
Adding and deleting references
If references are added in the proof stage, they and their corresponding citations must be inserted per their proper numerical order and the rest of the citations/references renumbered accordingly. References deleted in the proof stage will read, for example, “3. Reference deleted in proof.” Their corresponding numbers will remain in the text.
Reference list formats
For the reference list, follow the style of the examples listed here, noting that each reference is numbered according to the number in which it appears in the text.
Journal articles
The journal encourages the use of doi numbers in references. For references to journal articles, include authors’ names (invert only the first author’s last name and initials; use “et al.” after the first 10 author names), year, complete article titles, volume number, journal name, inclusive page numbers, and doi number when available. Abbreviate the names of journals as in the Serial Sources for the Biosis Data Base; spell out the names of unlisted journals.
See the examples below:
	1	Cole, S., and J. W. Moore. 1960. Potassium ion current in the squid giant axon: dynamic characteristics. Biophys. J . 1:1–14.
	2	Loboda, and C. M. Armstrong, 2001. Resolving the gating charge movement associated with late transitions in K channel activation. Biophys. J . 81:905–916.
	3	Johnston, I. G., B. C. Rickett, and N. S. Jones. 2014. Explicit tracking of uncertainty increases the power of quantitative rule-of-thumb reasoning in cell biology. Biophys. J. 107:2612–2617, doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2014.08.040.
	4	Álvarez-González, R. Melli, E. Bastounis, R. A. Firtel, J. C. Lasheras, and J. C. del Álamo. 2015. Three-dimensional balance of cortical tension and axial contractility enables fast amoeboid migration. Biophys. J. In press.
Preprints
Kappen, B., and V. Gome. 2009. Optimal control as a graphical model interface problem, arXiv, arXiv:0901.0633v2, http://arxiv.org/abs/0901.0633v2 Opens in new window (preprint posted March 10, 2009).
Zhang, D., and M. Glotzer. 2014. Efficient site-specific editing of the C. elegans genome. bioRxiv, doi: 10.1101/007344 (preprint posted April 17, 2014).
Information in public repositories
Manuscripts that refer to information in a public database (such as structures in the RCSB Data Bank) must cite the publication, if available, in which the original information was reported as well as the database serial number.
Abstracts
Hohendanner, F., F. Heinzel, L. Blatter. 2016. Dyssynchronous CA removal in atrial cardiac myocytes. 2016 Biophysical Society Meeting Abstracts. Biophys. J. 110(3), Suppl 1, Abstract 515-Pos.
Complete books
Phillips, R., J. Kondev, and J. Theriot. 2009. Physical Biology of the Cell. Garland Science, New York.
Articles in books
Seddon, J. M., and R. H. Templer. 1995. Polymorphism of lipid-water systems. In Handbook of Biological Physics, vol 1. Structure and Dynamics of Membranes, From Cells to Vesicles. R. Lipowsky and E. Sackmann, editors. Elsevier/North Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 97–160.
Commercial software
All commercial software and products should provide the name of the manufacturer [e.g., MATLAB (The MathWorks)].
Websites
Web references should be treated no differently than other references and should appear as follows: Biophysical Society. 2010. 08 July 2010. https://www.biophysics.org/ Opens in new window
Dissertation/thesis
Smith, J.P. (1985). DNA sequences. PhD thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Figures. It is preferred, but not required, that all figures be embedded in the manuscript where they are first called out. If not embedded, please include at the end of the manuscript. Figure titles and legends should consist of a brief title that describes the entire figure, without citing specific panels, and a subsequent description of each panel. Each figure must be numbered consecutively with whole numbers. In other words, figures must be numbered as Figure 1, Figure 2, Figure 3, etc., rather than as Figure 1a, Figure 1b, Figure 1c, etc. Figures may not exceed one page. Figure titles may not contain parenthetical information, reference citations, or footnotes. All reference citations within a figure must also be included in the figure legend. For any figures presenting pooled data, the measures should be defined in the figure legends (for example, data are represented as the mean ± SEM).
Tables. It is preferred, but not required, that all tables be embedded in the manuscript where they are first called out. If not embedded, please include at the end of the manuscript after figures and legends. All tables should be double-spaced and carry a title. Do not use vertical rules. Tables should not be saved as figures, i.e., as .jpg or .tif files. All tables intended for print should be incorporated into the end of the manuscript Word file. Tables should not be uploaded individually. When creating a table, please use the Microsoft Word table function, and please do not place an Excel table into a Word document. Tables not created with the Microsoft Word table function will be sent back for revision. Do not submit a table in PDF format. Word tables should not be tab or space delineated and should not include colored text or shading; embedded graphics with color are OK. Do not use paragraph returns to separate data within a cell. Tables should include a title, and footnotes and/or legends should be concise. Table titles may not contain parenthetical information, reference citations, or footnote citations. Use superscripted lowercase letters (beginning with “a”) for footnotes in tables. Do not use numbers or symbols. Tables must be numbered as Table 1, Table 2, Table 3, etc., rather than as Table 1a, Table 1b, Table 1c, etc. If italic font is used within a table to indicate some feature of the data, an explanation of its meaning must be given in the table legend. Bold text may not be used in tables. If a referenced paper or study is mentioned within a table, it must be included in the references list and must be cited within the table by its appropriate citation number (e.g., “(1)"). All abbreviations within a table must be defined in the table legend or footnotes.
Supporting material. Supporting material will be published in the online version of the journal. It should enhance the article and provide additional substantive information. The supporting material will be evaluated during the peer review process, along with the article manuscript. It will be accepted only if the reviewers and/or the editors determine that the information provides additional substance to the article and enhances the reader's scientific understanding of the research. Please provide one PDF document containing all text, tables, figures, and references for the supporting material. This document will not be copyedited or typeset; therefore, please provide a file that you consider ready for publication online. Movies, Excel tables, and other supporting material unsuitable for the PDF document format should be provided as separate files. Large data files and models should be sent in a .zip file.
Supporting material files are restricted to (1) figures that cannot be rendered in print with enough detail to be informative; (2) tables that have too many columns and/or rows to fit across two printed pages; (3) descriptions, tables, and figures that would substantially lengthen the print version of the manuscript; (4) movies; and (5) supplemental methods (see below). Supplemental materials and methods should be limited to those materials or methods related to the supplemental display items, detailed analytical methods, and tabular presentations of primers or other information that would not fit well in the main text for formatting reasons.
Supporting material should be provided with the original submission. Please follow the figure guidelines below for preparing figures. All figures and tables should have titles and legends.
Please provide a single PDF that contains all supplemental case reports, figures and legends, supplemental tables, and supporting references (in this order). If a supplemental table cannot fit onto two 8.5 × 11 inch pages, please instead supply the table as an Excel file. Please do NOT include the title or author list in the PDF ; we will add a coversheet with this information. Please also do not include movie titles and legends ; leave those in the main text, and we will move them to a separate online page that links to the movies. In addition, please do not include page numbers in your final PDF . We strongly recommend that the final size of this PDF be <10 MB to ensure successful downloads for all readers. Scientific errors detected in the supporting material after publication will require that a correction be published (as with errors in the main paper).
Please adhere to the following style preferences to ensure that your supporting material PDF is consistent with the copyedited version of your main text:
	•	Figures should be titled Figure S1, Figure S2, etc. (NOT Supplemental Figure 1, Supplemental Figure 2, etc.)
	•	Similarly, tables should be titled Table S1, Table S2, etc. (NOT Supplemental Table 1, Supplemental Table 2, etc.)
	•	Please use the word "Supplemental" rather than "Supplementary" in headings (e.g., "Supplemental materials and methods”).
	•	As with main-text figures, supplemental figures should include error bars where appropriate, and these error bars should be clearly defined in the figure legends.
Supplemental movies may be submitted through EM. Our preferred format is .mp4, but we also accept .mov, .avi, and .mpg files. Please note that we cannot accept movie files that require the reader to download particular codes; the files must be playable on computers with standard media players, such as QuickTime or Windows Media Player. To create high-quality files with maximum compression, as well as ensure that your video can be played on our website and ScienceDirect, the following specifications are strongly recommended:
	•	File size: <150 MB
	•	Frame rate: 30 frames per second
	•	Field order: none (progressive, not interlaced)
	•	Aspect ratio: widescreen 16:9
	•	Video codec: H.264
	•	Video bitrate: 2 Mbps
	•	Audio codec: AAC
	•	Audio bitrate: 128 kbps
If you choose the submission item "Supplemental Movies and Spreadsheets," the PDF builder will embed links within the PDF where editors and reviewers will be able to download files. This also works for Excel files that do not display properly once converted to a PDF.
For articles including data from 3D and/or multichannel image time series, authors are encouraged to supplement videos with z-stack, t-stack versions for use with the Virtual Microscope viewer Opens in new window . The Virtual Microscope, an application that enables users to view microscopic images at the highest level of detail, has been enhanced to support “z-stacks” (series of images taken at different focal planes) as well as “t-stacks” (series of images taken over time), enabling easy access to image series data.
Graphical abstract. Authors have the option to submit a graphical abstract, which is an image that summarizes the main findings of a paper. It adds a rich, visual component to the start of a paper, helping readers to quickly appreciate and understand the central message.
Graphical abstracts may be submitted at any stage but are only required with the final submission. The image should be 1,200 pixels square at 300 dpi, using Arial font with a size of 12–16 points; smaller fonts will not be legible online. Please refer to our graphical abstract guidelines (PDF) for more details and recommendations.
Videos. Cell Press offers authors the opportunity to publish supplemental videos (see the “Supporting material” section above) as well as video abstracts, Figure360s, and methods videos along with their papers. Submitted video files must conform to our guidelines, or you will be asked to revise them. For information on our video options, please refer to our Video guidelines .
Manuscript submission
Manuscripts should be submitted via our online submission system, EM. An author tutorial regarding online submission is available at the EM website. Authors may contact the editorial office ( [email protected] ) for assistance. Manuscript file types acceptable for submission include Word (.doc and .docx) LaTex, PDF, and *.txt.
EM will prompt you to upload the individual components of your manuscript (e.g., cover letter, text, figures, and supporting material) as separate files. The only files that are required at initial submission are the complete manuscript and a cover letter. Upon completion of this step, the website will compile the entire manuscript into a composite PDF that will contain links for the editors and reviewers to download the individual high-resolution files of each component. Please note that the version of the PDF that is accessible to reviewers does not contain the cover letter; any information therein will remain confidential.
Please be aware that EM will send all communications about the paper to the individual designated as corresponding author, except all authors will receive a notification of initial submission.
Cover letter
For all regular articles, reviews, and perspectives submissions, please include a cover letter describing the content and significance of the article. If applicable, please include the title and manuscript tracking number of any related submissions and any additional information the editor may need to be aware of.
Related works
Authors are required to include with their manuscript submission related manuscripts under review at other journals. If a manuscript is heavily dependent on information in a prior publication by the author(s), the authors are advised to include such publication(s) along with their manuscript submission. Failure to include this information may delay the review process and may be grounds for rejection. Related manuscripts that have been submitted elsewhere during the period of revision must accompany revised manuscripts.
Reviewers
Manuscripts typically are reviewed by at least two reviewers, who are solicited by the handling editor. At submission, authors are required to suggest at least three appropriate reviewers, who should be experts in the subject matter and who cannot have collaborated with the author(s) within the last three years. Authors may indicate non-preferred reviewers but are cautioned that valid reasons must be given for non-preference and that a too-extensive list of non-preferred reviewers is not a good recommendation. Editors reserve the right to consult with non-preferred reviewers. In the case of cross-disciplinary studies using modeling, novel methods, or theory applied to a biophysical research problem, authors are encouraged to suggest potential referees with the requisite expertise to assess both the technical and theoretical merits and the significance of potential applications of the work. Suggested reviewers are contacted at the discretion of the handling editor, and there is no guarantee that suggested reviewers will be used. If a qualified reviewer enlists the assistance of a colleague to complete a review under the assigned reviewer’s supervision, the reviewer must disclose this to BJ . The final decision regarding acceptance of a manuscript for publication will be made by the handling editor in consultation with senior editors. Reviewers are asked to judge whether the manuscript is suitable for BJ and whether revisions are needed.
Keywords
Keywords may be included in the submitted manuscript but are not required. Up to three areas of interest must be provided from a predetermined list at the time of submission.
Transfer of papers between Biophysical Journal and Biophysical Reports
Although each BPS journal is editorially independent, the handling editor of each journal may recommend that a manuscript be considered by an alternative BPS journal, and we have a system that allows you to transfer your manuscript from one journal to another; reviews and reviewers’ identities are also transferred if the reviewers have consented to sharing that information. If you have questions about the suitability of your paper for transfer, please contact the Editor-in-Chief of the receiving journal. Often, an Associate Editor of the receiving journal will be able to reach a decision based on the existing reviews. Occasionally, the Associate Editor might seek comments from additional reviewers. If you use our online system to transfer your paper, you will have a chance to edit your files before they are sent to the receiving journal. You can always submit your paper to another BPS journal without mentioning the first review process. In this case, the manuscript will be evaluated as a regular new submission.
Revised manuscripts
In addition to including the material described above for original submissions, revised manuscripts must also contain a detailed point-by-point response to the comments of the reviewers and/or editors. These responses should be compiled into a document titled “Response to Reviewers” and uploaded individually. This response will be shared if additional review is required. The cover letter is confidential to the editors and should briefly summarize how the revised manuscript addresses these comments. All changes to the manuscript should also be highlighted with the track changes feature in Microsoft Word. In general, revised manuscripts will be reconsidered only if resubmitted within 3 months of the date of the original decision.
Publication process
Final files
If your manuscript is accepted for publication, you will receive a pre-accept letter containing the instructions to upload your final files for editing and composition. At this time, the manuscript (with no tracked changes and including figure titles and legends) and figures must be submitted as separate files. You will receive a formal accept letter once the final files are sent to production for publication.
Manuscript text . The final version of the manuscript text must be submitted as a single-column Word document or LaTeX file. LaTeX users should submit the .bbl file and a final PDF version of the manuscript as well. The PDF version MUST include the reference section to ensure accuracy of the .bbl file.
Figures. Each figure must be uploaded as an individual file. The file name of each figure should include the number of the figure (e.g., “Figure 1.tif”). Please note that figures that include several parts (e.g., panels A, B, C, D) should be uploaded as one single-page file. Color figures will be e-color only (black and white in print and color online) unless the author specifies otherwise and incurs the cost of print color. Only one set of figures is needed; please do not upload two versions of the same figure. Figures should be designed to fit the full width of one column (3.25 inches) or two columns (6.75 inches). Digital figure files submitted through EM must conform to our digital figure guidelines, or authors will be asked to revise them. If you have any questions about digital files, please contact the Production Editor, Emily Bartucca, at [email protected] .
Figure360 . Authors are also encouraged to submit Figure360 videos to accompany their static figures. Each Figure360 video focuses on one figure from the article and is published alongside that figure. There is no limit to the number of figures that can be accompanied by a Figure360 video; however, each video must focus on only one figure. Videos are generally 2–3 minutes long and give readers a fun way to quickly and effectively grasp the major points of that figure. For additional information, examples, and instructions on how to create a Figure360 video, please visit the Figure360 page for authors .
Author accepted version
The author accepted version of the manuscript will be published online within ~5 days of receiving the formal acceptance letter. These articles appear in the online now section of the journal website . The PDF will be labeled as a “Journal Pre-proof.”
Proofs
Final files for accepted manuscripts are sent to TNQ for copyediting and page composition. The corresponding author will receive article proofs along with editing queries a few weeks after submission of final files. Proofs are due back within 24 hours.
Cover art
BJ accepts submissions for cover art from authors. Submissions may be uploaded along with final files. The image needs to be closely related to the manuscript. Artistic renditions are encouraged. Submissions should include a brief caption explaining the image. Images should measure 8.5 × 11.5 inches (portrait orientation or vertical aspect ratio), have a resolution of 600 dpi, and be a pdf or tif. Please do not include the journal title and other journal text in your cover image. Please contact [email protected] for more information about cover art. When an image has been selected for a particular issue, the author of the relevant article will be invited to prepare a blog post.
Publication fees and open access
Publication charges are determined by two factors: (1) whether the article is an open access article and (2) whether the corresponding author is a BPS member. The charges are as follows:

Non-member
Member*
Open access
$3,000
$2,400
Non-open access
$1,200
$950

*To receive the reduced member rate, the corresponding author must be a member of the BPS at the time of submission. Please be sure to indicate if you are a member at the time you upload your article.
These charges are subject to change based on the date on which a manuscript is submitted. At the time of submission, the corresponding author must agree to pay the publication charges associated with the manuscript or request a waiver. Failure to honor these obligations may affect future manuscript submissions.
Open access
BJ has a 12-month embargo policy, meaning that only BJ subscribers can gain access to the published article for the first 12 months. Authors have the choice to pay an article processing charge to make the article immediately and freely available for everyone to read and download (see table above). You may find more information about our open access policies and FAQs here .
Invited articles
There are no editorial fees for the following types of solicited articles: new and notables, biophysical perspectives, reviews, research highlights, and BJ classics.
Waivers
Requests for a waiver of publication fees will be considered in exceptional circumstances. An example of an exceptional circumstance is if author(s) are from a developing country eligible for free access to scientific research through Research4Life ( https://www.research4life.org/access Opens in new window ). A waiver must be requested and approved before an article is submitted. Authors agree at submission to pay all applicable charges if the article is published. If an article is submitted without an approved waiver, authors will be invoiced for the appropriate publication fees if the article is published. Waiver requests may be sent to [email protected] . Waivers are for the non-OA publication option only; if an author requires OA to satisfy a funder requirement, then the author will receive a discount on the OA charge equal to the non-OA publication charge.
Special issues
Manuscripts submitted to special issues are subject to the same rules governing publication fees outlined above.
Contacts at BJ
Editorial office
All questions concerning submissions, peer review, manuscript status, presubmission inquiries, and other matters should be directed to [email protected] .
Darren Early, Managing Editor
Meredith Zimmerman, Production Coordinator
Hillary Roegelein, Peer Review Coordinator
Production inquiries
Emily Bartucca, Production Editor, [email protected]
Prepublication publicity and press issues
Kristopher Benke, Media Relations Manager, [email protected]
